README.md, before:

# Submitting a finemapping run

## 1. Configure parameters

Configure parameters using input variables. See [RUNS.md](RUNS.MD) for an example.

## 2. Prepare inputs and submit Google Batch job

The first positional argument is job ID. (A job is a single submission which spawns a collection of tasks.) It has to be globally unique for all jobs, including ones submitted previously. Because of this, we append a timestamp, so the resulting job ID looks something like: `batch-example-20240410-115253`.

```bash
# 1. List collected loci.
gsutil ls ${COLLECTED_LOCI} | grep studyLocusId | rev | cut -d'/' -f2 | rev > /tmp/collected_loci

# 2. If needed: get the first N loci.
if [ ${FIRST_N_LOCI} -gt 0 ]; then
    head -n ${FIRST_N_LOCI} /tmp/collected_loci > /tmp/loci_to_process
else
    cat /tmp/collected_loci > /tmp/loci_to_process
fi

# 3. Prepare input and output paths.
awk \
    -v COLLECTED_LOCI=${COLLECTED_LOCI} \
    -v OUTPUT=${OUTPUT} \
    '{print COLLECTED_LOCI "/" $1 "," OUTPUT "/" $1}' \
    /tmp/loci_to_process \
    > /tmp/loci_input_output

# 4. Split the manifest into at most 100,000 long chunks.
rm /tmp/batch_chunk_*
split -l 100000 /tmp/loci_input_output /tmp/batch_chunk_

# 5. Operating on each chunk now.
for CHUNK in /tmp/batch_chunk_*; do
    # 5a. Add header and upload.
    export CHUNK
    MANIFEST_LOCATION=${MANIFEST_PREFIX}/$(basename $CHUNK)
    (echo "study_locus_input,study_locus_output"; cat $CHUNK) | gsutil cp - ${MANIFEST_LOCATION}
    # 5b. Create config.
    NUM_OF_TASKS=$(wc -l <$CHUNK)
    cat config.json \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_STUDY_INDEX@${STUDY_INDEX}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_MANIFEST@${MANIFEST_LOCATION}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_TASK_COUNT@${NUM_OF_TASKS}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_FINEMAPPING_PARAMS@${FINEMAPPING_PARAMS}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_PARALLELISM@${PARALLELISM}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_VM_TYPE@${VM_TYPE}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_CPU_MILLI@${CPU_MILLI}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_MEMORY_MIB@${MEMORY_MIB}@g" \
    > $CHUNK.json
    # 5c. Submit for processing.
    gcloud batch jobs submit \
        finemapping-$(date +%Y%m%d-%H%M%S) \
        --config=${CHUNK}.json \
        --project=open-targets-genetics-dev \
        --location=europe-west1
    sleep 2
done
```

Note the unique job ID(s) that has been assigned. You will need it for monitoring.

Job will shortly appear in the Google Batch dashboard (give it up to a minute): https://console.cloud.google.com/batch/jobs?referrer=search&project=open-targets-genetics-dev

## 3. Perform profiling

You can create a VM which will monitor the resource usage:

```bash
gcloud compute instances create batch-monitor \
    --project=open-targets-genetics-dev \
    --zone=europe-west1-b \
    --machine-type=n2d-highcpu-32 \
    --network-interface=network-tier=PREMIUM,stack-type=IPV4_ONLY,subnet=default \
    --maintenance-policy=MIGRATE \
    --provisioning-model=STANDARD \
    --service-account=234703259993-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com \
    --scopes=https://www.googleapis.com/auth/cloud-platform \
    --create-disk=auto-delete=yes,boot=yes,device-name=tskir-monitor,image=projects/debian-cloud/global/images/debian-12-bookworm-v20240415,mode=rw,size=500,type=projects/open-targets-genetics-dev/zones/europe-west1-b/diskTypes/pd-balanced \
    --no-shielded-secure-boot \
    --shielded-vtpm \
    --shielded-integrity-monitoring \
    --labels=goog-ec-src=vm_add-gcloud \
    --reservation-affinity=any
```

Then SSH into it:

```bash
gcloud compute ssh batch-monitor --zone europe-west1-b
screen
sudo apt install bc datamash parallel dos2unix
```

Copy `monitor.sh`:

```bash
gcloud compute scp monitor.sh poll.sh batch-monitor:~ --zone europe-west1-b
```

Once the job has started running, run `monitor.sh`:

```bash
bash monitor.sh UNIQUE_JOB_ID
```

Substitute the unique job ID you got from when you submitted the job.

It will monitor instance memory usage and output it to screen and into a log file every few minutes. Once there are no instances remaining, it will exit automatically.

## 5. Extract logs
```bash
# Set up Batch job ID. This was printed at the end of step 1.
export GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID=...
# *Full* path to the manifest of the given Batch run.
export MANIFEST=...

# Create folder for logs output.
mkdir -p logs_${GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID} logs_${GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID}/exit_statuses logs_${GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID}/failed_logs
cd logs_${GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID}

# Collect instance logs.
gcloud logging read \
    "resource.type=gce_instance AND labels.job_uid=$GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID" \
    --project=open-targets-genetics-dev \
    --format=json \
    > instance_log

# Extract exit statuses.
jq -r \
    '.[] | "\(.timestamp)\t\(.textPayload)"' \
    instance_log \
    | grep "Task task.*exited with status" \
    | sort -k1,1 \
    | sed -e 's@Task task/@@' -e 's@/./0 runnable 0 exited with status @|@' \
    | tr '|' '\t' \
    | awk -F'\t' '{print $0 > "exit_statuses/" $2}'

# Identify failed tasks.
tail -q -n1 exit_statuses/* \
    | awk -F'\t' '$3 > 0' \
    > failed_tasks

# Make directory structure for exit codes.
cut -f3 failed_tasks | sort -u | parallel mkdir failed_logs/{}

# Fetch logs for failed tasks only.
function fetch_logs () {
    export TASK_ID=$1
    export RETURN_CODE=$2
    gcloud logging read \
        "resource.type=batch.googleapis.com/Job AND labels.task_id=${TASK_ID}" \
        --project=open-targets-genetics-dev \
        --format=json \
        | jq -r '.[] | "\(.timestamp)\t\(.labels.task_id)\t\(.textPayload)"' \
        | sort -k1,1 \
        > failed_logs/${RETURN_CODE}/${TASK_ID}
}
export -f fetch_logs
parallel --colsep '\t' fetch_logs {2} {3} :::: failed_tasks

# Link task indexes to loci.
gsutil cat $MANIFEST \
    | cut -d',' -f1 \
    | cut -d'=' -f2 \
    | awk -v GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID=$GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID '{print GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID "-group0-" NR "\t" $1}' \
    | sort -k1,1 \
    > task_to_locus

# Rename logs of failed loci.
find failed_logs -type f | parallel echo "{/},{}" | tr ',' '\t' | sort -k1,1 > /tmp/task_to_filename
join task_to_locus /tmp/task_to_filename | tr ' ' '\t' | cut -f2,3 > /tmp/locus_to_filename
parallel --colsep '\t' mv {2} {2//}/{1} :::: /tmp/locus_to_filename
```

Commit message:

Detect not-completed tasks & fixes

README.md, after:

# Submitting a finemapping run

## 1. Configure parameters

Configure parameters using input variables. See [RUNS.md](RUNS.MD) for an example.

## 2. Prepare inputs and submit Google Batch job

The first positional argument is job ID. (A job is a single submission which spawns a collection of tasks.) It has to be globally unique for all jobs, including ones submitted previously. Because of this, we append a timestamp, so the resulting job ID looks something like: `batch-example-20240410-115253`.

```bash
# 1. List collected loci.
# Alternatively: if you need to manually run a list of loci, write them into /tmp/collected_loci in the format studyLocusId=12345...
gsutil ls ${COLLECTED_LOCI} | grep studyLocusId | rev | cut -d'/' -f2 | rev > /tmp/collected_loci

# 2. If needed: get the first N loci.
if [ ${FIRST_N_LOCI} -gt 0 ]; then
    head -n ${FIRST_N_LOCI} /tmp/collected_loci > /tmp/loci_to_process
else
    cat /tmp/collected_loci > /tmp/loci_to_process
fi

# 3. Prepare input and output paths.
awk \
    -v COLLECTED_LOCI=${COLLECTED_LOCI} \
    -v OUTPUT=${OUTPUT} \
    '{print COLLECTED_LOCI "/" $1 "," OUTPUT "/" $1}' \
    /tmp/loci_to_process \
    > /tmp/loci_input_output

# 4. Split the manifest into at most 100,000 long chunks.
rm -f /tmp/batch_chunk_*
split -l 100000 /tmp/loci_input_output /tmp/batch_chunk_

# 5. Operating on each chunk now.
for CHUNK in /tmp/batch_chunk_*; do
    # 5a. Add header and upload.
    export CHUNK
    MANIFEST_LOCATION=${MANIFEST_PREFIX}/$(basename $CHUNK)
    (echo "study_locus_input,study_locus_output"; cat $CHUNK) | gsutil cp - ${MANIFEST_LOCATION}
    # 5b. Create config.
    NUM_OF_TASKS=$(wc -l <$CHUNK)
    cat config.json \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_STUDY_INDEX@${STUDY_INDEX}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_MANIFEST@${MANIFEST_LOCATION}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_TASK_COUNT@${NUM_OF_TASKS}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_FINEMAPPING_PARAMS@${FINEMAPPING_PARAMS}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_PARALLELISM@${PARALLELISM}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_VM_TYPE@${VM_TYPE}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_CPU_MILLI@${CPU_MILLI}@g" \
    | sed -e "s@VALUE_MEMORY_MIB@${MEMORY_MIB}@g" \
    > $CHUNK.json
    # 5c. Submit for processing.
    gcloud batch jobs submit \
        finemapping-$(date +%Y%m%d-%H%M%S) \
        --config=${CHUNK}.json \
        --project=open-targets-genetics-dev \
        --location=europe-west1
    sleep 2
done
```

Note the unique job ID(s) that has been assigned. You will need it for monitoring.

Job will shortly appear in the Google Batch dashboard (give it up to a minute): https://console.cloud.google.com/batch/jobs?referrer=search&project=open-targets-genetics-dev

## 3. Perform profiling

You can create a VM which will monitor the resource usage:

```bash
gcloud compute instances create batch-monitor \
    --project=open-targets-genetics-dev \
    --zone=europe-west1-b \
    --machine-type=n2d-highcpu-32 \
    --network-interface=network-tier=PREMIUM,stack-type=IPV4_ONLY,subnet=default \
    --maintenance-policy=MIGRATE \
    --provisioning-model=STANDARD \
    --service-account=234703259993-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com \
    --scopes=https://www.googleapis.com/auth/cloud-platform \
    --create-disk=auto-delete=yes,boot=yes,device-name=tskir-monitor,image=projects/debian-cloud/global/images/debian-12-bookworm-v20240415,mode=rw,size=500,type=projects/open-targets-genetics-dev/zones/europe-west1-b/diskTypes/pd-balanced \
    --no-shielded-secure-boot \
    --shielded-vtpm \
    --shielded-integrity-monitoring \
    --labels=goog-ec-src=vm_add-gcloud \
    --reservation-affinity=any
```

Then SSH into it:

```bash
gcloud compute ssh batch-monitor --zone europe-west1-b
screen
sudo apt install bc datamash parallel dos2unix
```

Copy `monitor.sh`:

```bash
gcloud compute scp monitor.sh poll.sh batch-monitor:~ --zone europe-west1-b
```

Once the job has started running, run `monitor.sh`:

```bash
bash monitor.sh UNIQUE_JOB_ID
```

Substitute the unique job ID you got from when you submitted the job.

It will monitor instance memory usage and output it to screen and into a log file every few minutes. Once there are no instances remaining, it will exit automatically.

## 5. Extract logs

```bash
# Set up Batch job ID. This was printed at the end of step 1.
export GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID=...
# *Full* path to the manifest of the given Batch run.
export MANIFEST=...

# Create folder for logs output.
mkdir -p logs_${GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID} logs_${GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID}/exit_statuses logs_${GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID}/failed_logs
cd logs_${GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID}

# Link task indexes to loci.
gsutil cat $MANIFEST \
    | tail -n+2 \
    | cut -d',' -f1 \
    | cut -d'=' -f2 \
    | awk -v GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID=$GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID '{print GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID "-group0-" NR - 1 "\t" $1}' \
    | sort -k1,1 \
    > task_to_locus

# Collect instance logs.
gcloud logging read \
    "resource.type=gce_instance AND labels.job_uid=$GOOGLE_BATCH_JOB_ID" \
    --project=open-targets-genetics-dev \
    --format=json \
    --freshness=30d \
    > instance_log

# Extract exit statuses.
jq -r \
    '.[] | "\(.timestamp)\t\(.textPayload)"' \
    instance_log \
    | grep "Task task.*exited with status" \
    | sort -k1,1 \
    | sed -e 's@Task task/@@' -e 's@/./0 runnable 0 exited with status @|@' \
    | tr '|' '\t' \
    | awk -F'\t' '{print $0 > "exit_statuses/" $2}'

# Identify tasks which have not completed.
comm -13 <(ls exit_statuses | sort) <(cut -f1 task_to_locus | sort) \
| parallel echo -e 'no_timestamp\\t{}\\tnot_completed' '>' exit_statuses/{}

# Identify failed tasks (this includes the not completed ones).
tail -q -n1 exit_statuses/* \
    | awk -F'\t' '$3 > 0' \
    > failed_tasks

# Make directory structure for exit codes.
cut -f3 failed_tasks | sort -u | parallel mkdir failed_logs/{}

# Fetch logs for failed tasks only.
function fetch_logs () {
    export TASK_ID=$1
    export RETURN_CODE=$2
    gcloud logging read \
        "resource.type=batch.googleapis.com/Job AND labels.task_id=${TASK_ID}" \
        --project=open-targets-genetics-dev \
        --format=json \
        --freshness=30d \
        | jq -r '.[] | "\(.timestamp)\t\(.labels.task_id)\t\(.textPayload)"' \
        | sort -k1,1 \
        > failed_logs/${RETURN_CODE}/${TASK_ID}
}
export -f fetch_logs
parallel --jobs 4 --colsep '\t' fetch_logs {2} {3} :::: failed_tasks

# Rename logs of failed loci.
find failed_logs -type f | parallel echo "{/},{}" | tr ',' '\t' | sort -k1,1 > /tmp/task_to_filename
join task_to_locus /tmp/task_to_filename | tr ' ' '\t' | cut -f2,3 > /tmp/locus_to_filename
parallel --colsep '\t' mv {2} {2//}/{1} :::: /tmp/locus_to_filename
```
